BHLnames
John Doe, Jane Doe
2021-10-27

Abstract
Background
•
•
•
•
•

BHL exists
CoL exists
Global Names exists
BHL has index
COL has names with nomenclatural publications

New information
•
•
•
•
•
•

BHlnames now exists
BHLnames solves these 3 problems
Can access via web
Can access via API
Can see name->description via file
Local use is possible

Keywords
biodiversity informatics, biodiversity heritage library, catalogue of life, global names, nomenclature, taxonomy,
library informatics

Classifications
Taxon Classification
? Animalia, Plantae, all other from the list

Subject classification
Bioinformatics

Funder
Species File Group, BHL index

Introduction
• Biodiversity “layers” 100mil name-strings (lexial layer)
7mil names (nomenclatural layer)
2.5mil taxons

1

The Catalogue of Life (CoL) project was established in 2000 with the goal of developing a global species checklist
of all currently accepted scientific names (Bisby 2000). As of this writing, CoL contains over 2 million accepted
species. CoL additionally tracks historical scientific names that are no longer accepted and contains 1.6 million of
these synonyms, which enables finding species using either the currently accepted scientific name or their historical
names. Of the 3.7 million scientific names in CoL, only 53% have nomenclatural references to the original species
description in the literature.
Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL) is the largest open access collection of biodiversity literature. BHL was founded
in 2006 and is goverened by an internetional consortium (Kalfatovic et al. 2019). BHL currently comprises of 270
thousand volumes and 60 million pages of biodiversity texts. By far the best way to discover biodiversity information
in BHL is by searching for scintific names of organisms. The index of scientific names for BHL is created by Global
Names Architecture (GNA) project (Costantino 2020, Richard 2020).
The purpose of GNA is creation of services and tools that allow to globally connect biodiversity information
and research via scientific names. GNA was founded in 2007 and includes nomenclatural (ZooBank, a zoological
names registrator) and lexical tools (GNparser, GNverifier, GNfinder). GNfinder detects scientific names in texts.
GNparser normalizes scientific name-strings and extracts semantic meanings of their components. Normalised
scientific names allow to aggregate lexical variants of a name into a lexical group. GNverifier allows to search a
name-string of interest in more than 100 sources of biodiversity data. GNverifier uses data from Catalogue of Life,
Encyclopedia of Life, Index Fungorum, Global Biodiversity Information Facility and many others. GNA tools are
used for creation of scientific name index in BHL (Costantino 2020, Richard 2020).
The BHL index of scientific names is created by processing BHL data through BHLindex, yet another GNA tool.
BHLindex breaks each volume in BHL into tokens (words). Then it scans the tokens and uses heuristic and natural
language processing algorithms of GNfinder to detect possible scientific names. Later these names are verified
(reconciled and resolved) via GNverifier. The process is quite fast and allows to process 60 millions of BHL pages in
about 12 hours on a modern laptop. The eﬀiciency of the index creation allows to incrementally improve algorithms
and quality of the name-finding. GNverifier also provides metadata for each volume, calculating its biological
“context”. Such information includes the kingdom which contains most of the names found in a volume, as well as
the lowest clade that contains more than half of the volume’ names. The calculation uses managerial classification
of the Catalogue of Life.
Searching BHL for a particular name in the name index would often miss a significant amount of data because
taxons’ names do change with time. CoL currently contains ~4 million names, for ~2 million taxons. The database
of GNverifier contains 8 million canonical forms, for ~2.5 million known taxons. From this data we can estimate
that there are 2-3 names per a taxon on average. It means that to get more comprehensive data about species it is
important to search not only by one name, but by all names used for the species historically.
Another way to aquire information from BHL is by searching for a particular paper. Thanks to BioStore effort
metainformation and location is known for 200 000? papers in BHL. However to find a paper by a citation is still
hard, especially automatically by a script. There is a large variety of lexical variants for every journal name (FIG).
Format of data about the year of publication, a journal volume, pages differs from one citation to the next. It is
much easier to search for a year, volume and page data as numbers, but in BHL such metadata is stored as a string
and is not consistent throghout the corpus. Quite often such metadata is missing, or contains mistakes and it makes
the search harder.
TODO: Fig: examples of journal name different spellings
If a researcher has a citation of a nomenclatural event and tries to find the paper with original description of species,
it is often not a trivial task. Citations are hard to match to pages in BHL as described above. Sometimes OCR
errors change a name spelling and as a result exist in a volume under different spelling variants. Quite often people
add an annotation next to new species or combination, such as sp.nov, comb nov.
However such annotations are not consistent (FIG), and also often modified by OCR. When several species of the
same genus are described, the genus in the name is often abbreviated, which also masks the name from a researcher.
TODO: Fig: examples for annotations
The project we describe in this paper helps to adress these problems with the following solutions. BHLnames uses
name index, CoL data, and BHL metadata together to improve search of an information connected to a namestring, match a citation to a page in BHL, find pages that contain original descriptions of species.. BHLnames uses

2

CoL synonymy data to optionally expand name search to all its synonyms. BHLnames normalizes BHL data for
publication years and pages, making it easier to compare it with numeric representations of years and pages. The
project uses 2? million citations of nomenclatural events for names in CoL to provide data about nomenclatural
events. BHLnames normalizes journal names in a citation and BHL to match them together. We use Naive Bayes
approach to calculate probabilities of a citation to a BHL page match and return the best results. Such results are
provided via Dryad (Link)

Project description
Title: BHLnames
Study area description: Biodiversity Informatics
Design description: This is the whole paper actually (?)

Goals
The goals of BHLnames project are:
1. Provide an ability to search for a citation in BHL using citation metadata and the index of names data.
Use names’ index information to dramatically simplify search for a publication. Combine citation metadata
together with occurences of a name to point to possible pages of a citation with high probability.
2. Discover original descriptions and nomenclatural events in BHL.
Use the goal #1 together with citation and name information from CoL. Combine these data to determine
pages containing nomenclatural events for scientific names. Increase usability of BHL for biodiversity reseearchers by augmenting scientific names index with the nomenclatural events index.
3. Add “taxonomic intalligence” to the BHL’s index of scientific names.
Use goal #2 and the CoL data to optionally expand BHL name search with taxonomical information. Return
data not only for a particular name, but for its synonyms. Provide data about currently accepted name for
the taxa. Also, when available, provide data about nomenclatural events for all relevant names.
(Methods)

Technical introduction
BHLnames an Open Source project written in Go and JavaScript. It can be used independently by anybody with
Internet connection and a write access to a PostgreSQL database. It consists of one stand-alone file and requires
no additional dynamic libraries. The file can be downloaded at (GitHub link)
BHLnames requires a substantial initialization stage. After initialization it can be used in off-line mode.

Architecture
BHLnames’ code structure mostly uses Clean Architecture principles for organisation of its modules. The main
use-case functinality is defined in an in an interface (Link?).
The core (entity) modules that do not require I/O interactions with a database, internet or local storate, are located
in ‘ent’ directory. The ‘ent’ directory also contains interfaces implemented by modules that need I/O access. Such
approach uncouples core modules from particular implementations of external I/O processes and provides flexibility
for changing ways of storing and accessing the data.
The modules that require access to database, internet, interfaces to users, accesses to frameworks implement entity
interfaces and depend on the main use-case interface for providing functionality of BHLnames. One exception to
this rule is ‘bhlnames’ directory that contains command-line interface to the project.
There are 3 different kinds of user-interfaces:

3

1. Command-line application starts and stops the web-service or provides BHLnames functionality via terminal
window.
2. RESTful API provides endpoints for remote access to BHLnames functionality via HTTP calls.
3. Web-interface allows remote interactive access BHLnames users via Internet.
Dependencies
Initialization phase of the projct requires a remote access to remote data-dump of BHL located at (LINK). Also it
needs an access to a RESTful inteface of BHLindex application.
BHLindex is an Open Source application written in Go that creates scientific names index of BHL. The application
scans BHL’s 60 million pages, detects scientific names and provides data about their occurences via RESTful
interface. It is possible to use publicly available URL that serves BHLindex API at (LINK).
There are many dependencies on Go modules, some of them written specifically for Global Names project. We will
talk about some of GN modules further. Go dependencies are required only during the compilation of the project
and are not needed for running BHLnames service or command-line application.

Workflow
Data Import

Interfaces
GUI
Embeddable widget
API
Command line
Input formats

Audience
CoL ZooBank WoRMS? TW BHL users Taxonomists Librarians Citizen Scientists Nomenclators Other Reseachers
(Results)
Examples of usages
Summary of scores
Benchmarks
Open data deliverables
(Discussion)

Conclusions
• Jigsaw puzzle where a name is the first piece.
• We add more pieces
Advantages, impact
Missing parts
Ways to improve
How it helps for the other future developments
How to contribute?
Funding: skip it here? Same as above
4

Web location (URIs)
Homepage: bhlnames.globalnames.org
Wiki: github.com/gnames/bhlnames wiki (maybe, or nothing)
Download page: data or code? * code: https://github.com/gnames/bhlnames * data: some place on Dryad?
Download mirror: n/a
Bug database: https://github.com/gnames/bhlnames/issues
Mailing list: https://gitter.io/gnames/something ?
Blog: http://globalnames.org
Vendor: N/A ask Matt

Technical specification
Platform: ?
Programming language: Go, JavaScript?
Operating system: GNU/Linux
Interface language: JavaScript?
Service endpoint: * https://bionames.globalnames.org/api/v1 * https://apidoc.globalnames.org/bhlnames

Repository
Type: Git
Browse URI: https://github.com/gnames/bhlnames
Location: ?
Module: ?
Anonymous root: n/a

Usage license
MIT

Implementation
Implements specification: N/A
Audience:

Additional information
Acknowledgements
Thanks to you all. Rich Pyle for journal data

5

Author contributions
References
Figures
Tables
Supplementary material
Endnotes
Bisby FA (2000) The quiet revolution: Biodiversity informatics and the Internet. Science 289: 2309–2312. https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.289.5488.2309
Costantino G (2020) BHL Improves the Speed and Accuracy of its Taxonomic Name Finding Services with gnfinder.
Available from: https://blog.biodiversitylibrary.org/2020/07/bhl-improvestaxonomic-name-services-gnfinder.h
tml.
Kalfatovic MR, Costantino G, Rinaldo CA (2019) The Biodiversity Heritage Library: Unveiling a World of Knowledge About Life on Earth. In:, 352–355. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30760-8_32
Richard J (2020) Improving Taxonomic Name Finding in the Biodiversity Heritage Library. Biodiversity Information
Science and Standards 4. https://doi.org/10.3897/biss.4.58482

6

